# Using p5.js in TSX

Here's a list of things to mind when creating a sketch:

- Use the `SketchRendererNext` component from the `components` folder, and not directly the `SketchRenderer` component
- Use the `useSketch` (see [Stateless Sketches](#stateless-sketches)) or `useStatefulSketch` (see [Stateful Sketches](#stateful-sketches)) hooks

## Stateless sketches

A stateles sketch is a sketch that does not need to access React state.
This does not mean that the sketch cannot hold some state using variabeles declared inside the sketch function scope.

Stateless sketches are declared using the `useSketch` hook.
`useSketch` takes a single parameter:

- a sketch function that takes one parameter: a p5 instance (see [p5 object](#p5-object)).

```tsx
import SketchRenderer from '../components/SketchRendererNext'
import useSketch from '../hooks/useSketch'

const YourStatelessSketch = () => {
  const sketch = useSketch((p5) => {
    ...
  })

  return <SketchRenderer sketch={sketch} />
}
```

## Stateful sketches

A stateful sketch is a sketch that, in addition to its own state, can access the state of its parent React component.
This is achieved by capturing the state in an object and passing it through a React ref to the sketch.

**WARNING**: trying to access variables outside of the sketch function scope from inside the sketch function scope will result in reading stale values. This happens because the sketch function is memoized through `useCallback` which "freezes" the function closure.

Stateful sketches are declared using the `useStatefulSketch` hook.
`useStatefulSketch` takes two parameters:

- an object holding any values that we want to pass into the p5 sketch (for example compoenent state or props)
- a sketch function that takes two parameters:
  - a React ref that holds the current state
  - a p5 instance (see [p5 object](#p5-object))

Inside the sketch function you can access the state object through `stateRef.current`

```tsx
import SketchRenderer from '../components/SketchRendererNext'
import useStatefulSketch from '../hooks/useStatefulSketch'

const YourStatefulSketch = ({ prop }) => {
  const [state, setState] = useState(1);
  const sketch = useStatefulSketch({ state, prop }, (stateRef, p5) => {
    ...
    console.log('values', stateRef.current.state, stateRef.current.prop)
    ...
  })

  return <SketchRenderer sketch={sketch} />
}
```

## p5 object

Inside a sketch function you have access to the `p5` object.
All p5 functions such as `setup`, `draw`, etc... have to be declared as methods of the `p5` object.
All the global functions that are normally supplied by p5 such as `createCanvas`, `fill`, `rect`, etc... are methods of the `p5` object.

```tsx
const sketch = useSketch((p5) => {
  p5.setup = () => {
    p5.createCanvas(500, 500)
    ...
  }
  p5.draw = () => { ... }
})
```

Classes need to be imported from `window.p5`, which is only available in the DOM, so do it inside p5 methods.

```tsx
const sketch = useSketch((p5) => {
  p5.setup = () => {
    const { Vector } = window.p5
  }
})
```

## Examples

Examples can be found here:

- [src/sketches/Example](../src/sketches/Example.tsx)
- [src/sketches/ExampleTimer](../src/sketches/ExampleTimer.tsx)
